# Automatically Generated Make Dependencies #

This folder contains a bunch of short files with auxiliary make dependencies.
They are generated automatically by a Python script `getdependencies.py`.

## A Note about Multiple Outputs ##

It is important to note that Make does not support creating multiple outputs
from a single recipe invocation. Make handles multiple targets by simply
copying the recipe for each target. This means that if you write a rule like
```
data1.dat data2.dat data3.dat : calculation.m
    octave calculation.m
```
i.e., running `octave` to produce `.dat` files, Make will translate it to
```
data1.dat : calculation.m
    octave calculation.m

data2.dat : calculation.m
    octave calculation.m
    
data2.dat : calculation.m
    octave calculation.m
```
This means that `calculation.m` will be run *three separate times*! There is
some magic you can do to work around this limitation (which is implemented for
some common recipes, e.g., producing a `.tex` and `.eps` file from a single
execution of `gnuplot`), but it's hacky and prone to bugs if you don't do it
right. Thus, we do not attempt to handle recipes that make multiple outputs
from a single recipe execution.

To avoid these situations, the recipes in the Makefile assume that source files
make single outputs with the same name. E.g., for files listed as
`OCT_MAT_SRC`, it is assumed that `*.m` creates the data file `*.mat`.
Similarly, for `PY_PLOT_SRC`, it is assumed that `*.py` makes `*.pdf`. If you
want something else to happen, you'll have to make the recipes yourself at the
bottom of the Makefile.

If you do absolutely need this multiple-output type of structure, you should
rewrite the base `calculation.m` to produce a single large `.mat` file, and
then create three separate small wrapper scripts to produce the separate
pieces. The recipes then look like
```
data_all.mat : calculation.m
    octave calculation.m

data1.dat data2.dat data3.dat : %.dat : %.m calculation.mat
    octave $<
```
However, unless you're doing something that requires a very precise data format
in the `.dat` files (e.g., 3D plots in Gnuplot), consider using
`calculation.mat` directly in subsequent recipes, instead of creating all of the
intermediate data files.

For cases where you want to make the same plot multiple times with different
datasets (i.e., run the same plotting commands but with different data), you
should put the plotting commands in a file in the `lib` directory, and then
make a thin wrapper script for each separate plot that depends on both the
current dataset and the commands in the `lib` folder.

## Background ##

In the past, the make paradigm has been

| Inputs                 | Recipe         | Outputs                    |
|------------------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| `base.m`               | -- Octave  --> | `base.dat` (or `base.mat`) |
| `base.dat` + `base.gp` | -- Gnuplot --> | `base.eps` + `base.tex`    |
| `base.eps`             | -- eps2pdf --> | `base.pdf`                 |

with a completely separate mfile for each figure.

However, it is often the case that multiple figures should be related, e.g. as
minor variations of a single dynamical system, or different representations of
the same data. Thus, based on this old paradigm, you would create multiple m
files, e.g. base1.m and base2.m that perform essentially the exact same
calculation and differ only in what specific numbers get thrown into base*.dat.

There are two main problems with this. First, in the case where the calculations
are the same, you end up doing them twice for no reason. If these are relatively
small calculations, then this is no issue, but for anything that takes even a
bit of time (~30 seconds), this starts to get annoying, and so we would rather
only generate the data once. The second and more serious problem is that if you
wish to make a single change to the calculation, you now have to do it multiple
places. For example, if you're doing multiple simulations with a system
xdot = A x + B u and you decide you want to tweak the A matrix, then you now
have to do that three separate places. Alternatively, suppose you want to use
a common style for all of your plots. The easy way this would be done in the
past is just copy/paste the relevant lines of code into multiple gp files, but
then changing anything becomes a nightmare.

To remedy these issues, we now use the paradigm that if literally identical code
or data is to be used in multiple places, then it should appear in only one file
and just be called from there. This good programming practice, but it now means
the simple formulaic make rules from before are no longer sufficient. For
example, consider the following build process:

| Inputs                                      | Recipe         | Outputs     |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------|-------------|
| `calc.m`                                    | -- Octave -->  | `calc.mat`  |
| `plot1.gp` + `common_style.gp` + `calc.mat` | -- Gnuplot --> | `plot1.pdf` |
| `plot2.gp` + `common_style.gp` + `calc.mat` | -- Gnuplot --> | `plot2.pdf` |

Here, plot1.pdf and plot2.pdf are made from the same calculation according to
the same common style, with the only difference being exactly what data is
plotted. Unfortunately, using the old simpler make rules, there is no way to
tell make that plot1.pdf and plot2.pdf depend on calculation.m and
common_style.gp, and if either of these two dependencies are changed, the user
is unsure whether the target files are actually rebuilt. To handle this problem,
we now need a bunch of ad-hoc make rules, e.g. something like

    plot1.pdf : calculation.m common_style.gp
    plot2.pdf : calculation.m common_style.gp

with the dependence on plot1.gp and plot2.gp handled by the pattern-based rules.
While we can throw a huge list of such rules at the end of the makefile, this
becomes unweildy: if you edit a source file so that it gains or loses
dependencies, you also have to open up the Makefile and cull through a huge list
of junk to add or remove the relevant dependencies. A much cleaner approach
would be to allow the source files themselves to tell make what their
dependencies are; thus, everything is contained within the source file, and the
Makefile doesn't need to be hand-edited with every dependence change.

## Specifying Dependencies ##

Dependencies are specified using specially formatted comments in the header of
source files. The script `getdependencies.py` will then parse these comments and
transcribe them into Make syntax in a `.dep` file (e.g., dependency information
from a file `foo.bar` gets put in `foo.bar.dep`, which is kept in the
`.dependencies` subdirectory).

When this structure was first created, these comments used a very explicit
syntax to make it clear that the given comment specified a rule for Make.
As users became more comfortable with the idea of dependencies in the actual
source files, a simpler syntax was developed. Both methods are supported. See
the following two sections for their descriptions.

### New Syntax ###

Inside a source file, you can specify dependencies using a block of the form

    [depends] file1 file2 ...

with the line prefixed by the appropriate comment character for the current
source file. Dependencies specified this way *are* recursive, which means if
`foo.m` has `[depends] bar.m` and `bar.m` has `[depends] baz.m`, then the
output of `foo.m` will be remade whenever `baz.m` is modified.

To tell Make what the output of a given file is, you can use a block of the
form

    [makes] <outputtype>

in which `<outputtype>` is one of the following:

- `figure`: Creates appropriate figure targets `figures/paper/*.pdf`,
  `figures/presentation/*.pdf`, etc.
- `gnuplot`: Creates Gnuplot outputs `*.eps` and `*.tex`
- `mat`: Creates `*.mat`
- `dat`: Creates `*.dat`
- `tex`: Creates `*.tex`
- `pdf`: Creates `*.pdf`

Note that `*` refers to the stem of the source file (e.g., `foo` for a source
file `foo.m`). If you put something other than the above list, an error will be
issued. By default, if there is a `[depends]` block but no `[makes]` block, then
the output will be guessed from the file extension as follows:

- `.py`: `figure`
- `.m`: `mat`
- `.jl`: `mat`
- `.tex`: `pdf`
- `.gp`: `gnuplot`

### Legacy Syntax ###

Dependencies are specified using lines of the form

    <<MAKERULE>>foo.pdf : calculation.m common_style.gp

within the header of the file. Note that the line should be prefixed with the
appropriate comment character. The general format is

    <<MAKERULE>> targets : dependencies

which signals to Make that the given `targets` depend on `dependencies`.

A handy feature is the use of certain substitutions in these rules. By
default, it is assumed that all dependencies and targets are specified relative
to the build directory. For files that don't fit this prescription, you can
either hand-code the paths, or use one of the following substitutions:

- `%FIGURE%` : Used for pdf figures. Note that this handles separate versions
  for the paper, presentation, and poster.
    
- `%LIB%` : Used for shared "library" files in the `lib` folder. This is
  probably the most useful substitution besides `%FIGURE%`.
    
- `%SCRIPT%` : The contents of the `script` folder. You should probably never
  need to use this one because all user-defined code should go in `lib`.
    
- `%SRC%` : Used to denote a source file in the root repo directory. Useful
  for rules with recipes (see below).

As an example, suppose `figure.pdf` reads data from `data.mat` and uses a module
`plot.py` (which is stored in the `lib` folder). Then, at the top of
`figure.py`, you would write

    #<<MAKERULE>>%FIGURE%/figure.pdf : data.mat %LIB%/plot.py

This will ensure `figure.pdf` (all versions) is rebuilt whenever `data.mat`
changes, or whenever you edit the "library" file `plot.py`. If the output files
have the same stem (i.e., `figure.py` creates `figure.pdf`), then you can also
use the following substitutions:

- `%THSIFIGURE%` : Creates appropriate figure targets `figures/paper/*.pdf`,
  `figures/presentation/*.pdf`, etc.

- `%THISMAT%` : Creates `build/*.mat`.

- `%THISTEX%` : Creates `build/*.tex`.

- `%THISGNUPLOT%` : Creates `build/*.gnuplot`, which is treated as `build/*.tex`
  and `build/*.eps` by the Makefile.

In these substitutions, `*` refers to the stem of the source file.

In contrast to the new syntax, dependencies specified this way are *not*
recursive. That is, if `foo.m` depends on `bar.m` which depends on `baz.m`,
specifying

    #<<MAKERULE>> %THISMAT% : bar.m

in the header of `foo.m` will *not* make `foo.mat` depend on `baz.m`.
